Jimmy Blacklock (born August 28, 1980)[1] is an American lawyer who has served as the chief justice of the Texas Supreme Court since 2025. He previously served as a justice of the same court from 2018 to 2025.

Blacklock was born in Houston, Texas. His family moved to Missouri City, Texas, where he attended public school in Fort Bend County, graduating from Elkins High School. He graduated with highest honors from the University of Texas at Austin before attending Yale Law School,[2] where he was a member of the Federalist Society and the President of the Yale Law Republicans.[3] After graduation, He clerked for Judge Jerry Edwin Smith of the United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit.

After clerking for Judge Smith, Blacklock worked in Vinson & Elkins in Houston and Austin. He also served briefly in the United States Department of Justice under President George W. Bush.[4] Blacklock left V&E to work for Texas Attorney General Greg Abbott. Under Abbott’s leadership, Blacklock defended the State of Texas’s Voter ID laws, its abortion laws, its heterosexual marriage laws, and its 2011 redistricting maps.  Blacklock advocated in court for religious liberty and gun rights.  He also served as Deputy Attorney General, a role that included management of the Opinions, Open Records, and Public Finance divisions of the Attorney General’s Office.

In 2015, Blacklock followed Abbott to the Governor’s office, where he served as Abbott’s general counsel.  He continued to represent the State in court while also coordinating the Governor’s oversight of executions and advising the Governor on legislation and other matters. Governor Abbott announced Blacklock’s appointment to the Texas Supreme Court in November 2017, and Blacklock was sworn in on January 2, 2018[5][6]

Blacklock was up for election for the first time on November 6, 2018.[7] He did not have an opponent in the Republican Primary. In the general election, he defeated Democratic challenger Steven Kirkland, a district court judge in Harris County (Houston), with 53.16% of the statewide votes. The statewide turnout in this race was 51.74%.[8]

